.nh
.TH YAMLCAST(1) YAMLcast User Manual
Ingy döt Net
2026

.SH NAME
yamlcast \- render a YAML screencast description as an animated GIF


.SH SYNOPSIS
\fByamlcast\fP [\fB--dry-run\fP] \fIFILE\fP


.SH DESCRIPTION
\fByamlcast\fP reads \fIFILE\fP, a YAML description of a terminal screencast,
translates it into a \fBvhs\fP(1) \fB\&.tape\fR script, and invokes \fBvhs\fP to render
the resulting animated GIF.

.PP
The translator is a YAMLScript program.
\fBys-0\fR, Go, and \fBvhs\fP are installed on demand into the project's
\fB\&./.cache/\fR directory.


.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB--dry-run\fP
Print the generated \fB\&.tape\fR script to standard output and do not invoke
\fBvhs\fP\&.


.SH INPUT FORMAT
The input file is a YAML mapping.
The recognized top-level keys are:
.TP
\fBoutput\fP
Optional.
The name of the output GIF file.
If omitted, defaults to the input file name with its \fB\&.yaml\fR or \fB\&.yml\fR
extension replaced by \fB\&.gif\fR (so \fBfoo.yaml\fR produces \fBfoo.gif\fR).

.TP
\fBsteps\fP
Optional sequence describing the actions to record.
Each entry is one of:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
A single-key mapping.
Supported keys are
\fBtype\fP, \fBsleep\fP, \fBenter\fP, \fBimage\fP, \fBtab\fP, \fBbackspace\fP,
\fBspace\fP, \fBhide\fP, \fBshow\fP, \fBscreenshot\fP, \fBctrl\fP, \fBsource\fP,
\fBrequire\fP, and \fBbg_color\fP\&.
\fBenter\fP may be given an optional text value; in that form the text
is typed and then \fBEnter\fP is pressed.
\fBimage\fP takes a path; the image is rendered in the cast terminal
with \fByc-image\fR, with the typing of the command hidden.
\fBbg_color\fP takes a hex color (with or without a leading \fB#\fR) and
changes the terminal background mid-cast.
.IP \(bu 2
A bare ALL-CAPS string (e.g. \fBCLEAR\fP, \fBENTER\fP, \fBCTRL+L\fP):
emits the matching VHS key command with no typing.
\fBRESET\fP is a special case: it re-emits every top-level setting,
reverting any mid-cast overrides (such as \fBbg_color\fP) back to
the baseline.
.IP \(bu 2
A bare string that names an existing file (short form for \fBimage:\fR):
the file is rendered as an image.
.IP \(bu 2
Any other bare string (short form for \fBenter:\fR):
the string is typed and \fBEnter\fP is pressed.
.IP \(bu 2
A bare number (short form for \fBsleep:\fR):
sleep for that many milliseconds.
.RE

.PP
Any other top-level key is treated as a VHS \fBSet\fR directive.
Keys use \fBsnake_case\fR and are converted to VHS's \fBPascalCase\fR automatically
(for example, \fBfont_size\fR becomes \fBFontSize\fR).

.PP
Inside a \fBtype\fP value, bracketed tokens are expanded into the matching VHS
key commands.
Recognized tokens are
\fB<ENTER>\fR, \fB<TAB>\fR, \fB<SPACE>\fR, \fB<BACKSPACE>\fR,
\fB<UP>\fR, \fB<DOWN>\fR, \fB<LEFT>\fR, \fB<RIGHT>\fR,
and \fB<CTRL+X>\fR for any single key \fIX\fP\&.


.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fBYAMLCAST_ROOT\fP
Absolute path to the YAMLcast project directory.
\fByamlcast\fP refuses to run unless this is set.
Source the project's \fB\&.rc\fR file to set it.


.SH EXIT STATUS
\fByamlcast\fP exits 0 on success and non-zero on any error, including a
missing or invalid input file, an unset \fBYAMLCAST_ROOT\fP, or a failed
\fBvhs\fP invocation.


.SH EXAMPLES
Render \fBexample.yaml\fR to the GIF named by its \fBoutput\fR key:

.EX
yamlcast example.yaml
.EE

.PP
Print the generated \fB\&.tape\fR script without rendering:

.EX
yamlcast --dry-run example.yaml
.EE


.SH FILES
.TP
\fI$YAMLCAST_ROOT/.cache/local/bin/vhs\fP
The locally-installed \fBvhs\fP binary.

.TP
\fI$YAMLCAST_ROOT/.rc\fP
Shell snippet that exports \fBYAMLCAST_ROOT\fP and extends \fBPATH\fP and
\fBMANPATH\fP\&.


.SH SEE ALSO
\fBvhs\fP(1), \fBmake\fP(1)

.PP

\[la]https://github.com/charmbracelet/vhs\[ra], 
\[la]https://yamlscript.org\[ra]


.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 2026 Ingy döt Net.
Licensed under the MIT License.
